Add conda doctor blogpost (#133)
conda-incubator/conda-dot-org: blog/2023-05-11-conda-doctor.md

---
title: "conda doctor : Detecting conda environment inconsistencies easily"
slug: "2023-05-11-conda-doctor"
description: |
    The new `conda doctor` command allows users to detect packages with missing files in their conda environments.

authors: [forgottenprogramme]
tags: [conda, environments]

---

> The newest `conda doctor` command will be available with the latest conda 23.5.0, enabling conda users to detect corrupted packages (packages with files missing) in their conda environment quickly.

Reviewer: I'm also thinking the intro should start with a "so what?" sentence first. Here's a possibility that would cover the entire intro:

"One of the more tedious problems that can happen to a conda environment is when package files are accidentally deleted. The package becomes corrupt, your project throws errors, and you have to painstakingly, manually search for the missing files. That is, until now. The new `conda doctor` command will be available with conda version 23.5.0 and enable conda users to quickly detect corrupted packages (packages with files missing) in their conda environment. Instead of manually checking for missing files, with `conda doctor`, users can learn about all corrupted packages in their conda environment with a single, short command."

I'm not sure if "project" is the right term above. I've never had a missing package file, so I'm not terribly familiar. Does the IDE throw errors when the user attempts to run a script or does conda itself complain at them?

## How Does It Work?
Every conda environment has a `conda-meta` directory associated with it, which keeps a log of all the packages (and all the files in them) ever installed into that environment. 
`conda doctor` parses these metadata files, checks for the existence of each of the listed files and reports about the missing ones. 
This is extremely helpful as it is otherwise very difficult to know that a package has missing files and to detect these missing files in the package. 

## The Plugin Mechanism 
`conda doctor` is implemented using conda’s new [plugins mechanism](https://www.anaconda.com/blog/introducing-a-new-plugin-mechanism-for-conda/), utilizing the "subcommand plugin hook" and comes bundled with conda itself.

Often the issues that conda users run into are issues in their conda environment. The idea behind implementing a `conda doctor` command is to "diagnose" the inconsistencies in a conda environment and report to the user, therefore empowering the user to better understand the cause of the issues they are experiencing.

## A Nine Year Old Issue

> What’s interesting is that [this feature was requested by Peter Wang](https://github.com/conda/conda/issues/474), the CEO of Anaconda, nine years ago in the early days of conda. A number of features requested from `conda doctor` back then ended up being implemented elsewhere in conda over the years. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What’s interesting is that [this feature was requested by Peter Wang](https://github.com/conda/conda/issues/474), the CEO of Anaconda, nine years ago in the early days of conda. A number of features requested via this `conda doctor` issue back then ended up being implemented elsewhere in conda over the years.
```

Reviewer: Not totally sure if this is the case, but if it is, wanted to make it more clear. I assume the features outlined in that linked issue are what you are meaning?

Author: Yes.

`conda doctor` was eventually boiled down to “a command that will diagnose the health of the environment and report inconsistencies to the user”. 

## Health Checks
We designed the `conda doctor` functionality to have various “health checks” for the user’s environment. The first health check implemented and made available to users in this release is “detect missing files in packages”. More health checks will be made available in `conda doctor` in future releases. 

    

> Go check out the new `conda doctor` command and do let us know of any “health checks” you would like `conda doctor` to have, that would make your experience using `conda` better. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Go check out the new `conda doctor` command and let us know of any “health checks” you would like `conda doctor` to have that would improve your conda experience. 
```
